---
layout: post
title: 8: Day 4
---

# Day 11

### March 25, 2017

#### This past week

Over the last several days since I last posted, I have let the terrarium be, refraining from fiddling around with the contents. Throughout the week, I occasionally adjusted the position of the acrylic covering, allowing the levels of humidity to decrease in the hopes of lessening the opportunity for fungal growth. While I am not yet sure to what degree this has stunted the spread of fungal growth, the soil in the small environment nearly dried out. Twice this week, I watered the soil and sprayed the plants down.

#### Gnats...

Earlier this evening, I had a closer inspection of the terrarium, instead of simply glancing at it as I had been throughout the week. This was mainly due to the fact that I wanted to add an ornamental piece to the set-up: a piece of wood that I had washed with dishwashing soap (collected from a trip up to the Sandia mountains). While adding the piece contributed to the overall "natural" feel of the terrarium, I discovered what I had feared most about this set-up: a gnat infestation. Laying the piece of wood disturbed the gnats that had been crawling along. As soon as I noticed at least five adult gnats flitting about the walls of the tank, I realized that a new organism has made its home within the terrarium.

At first, I berated myself for not having controlled the environment better. I knew that the gnats migrated from the other soil sources I had in the space (at least 10 other potted plants, and one giant bag of potting soil). While I was momentarily frustrated, a sudden thought came to me: what do gnats feed on when trapped in an enclosed space, namely the terrarium? With a quick Google search, I found my answer, and much more, within [The Washington Post's article on gnats](https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/capital-weather-gang/post/the-scoop-on-gnats-what-weather-they-like-and-why-they-drive-us-nuts/2011/07/26/gIQAjSyoaI_blog.html?utm_term=.89474ec0fc4e).

**Points of interest:**
  - Gnat larvae live in moist environments
  - Gnats are small flies of the suborder Nematocera
  - Gnats serve a purpose in nature; they are an important food source for birds, bats and larger insects
  - They also pollinate flowers
  - _Gnat larva feast on fungus, algae or plants_
  
I quickly figured that the gnats taking residence in the terrarium are most likely [fungus gnats](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fungus_gnat), those that are common to house plants that especially thrive off of plant roots, decomposing matter, and fungal growths, all of which can definitely be found within the terrarium. With that being said, I am ultimately brought to a question I similarly had when I had first discovered fungal growths within the terrarium...

#### What now?

Of course, there are sub-questions to the aforementioned question:

1. Should I immediately try to get rid of the gnats?
2. If I do try, how should I go about it?
3. Should I let the gnats be to live in cohabitation with the other organisms?
4. How would I collect data from the gnats for generative music?
5. At what point should I intervene, if at all, if I decided to let them live?
6. _???_

As a lover of houseplants, I previously have had my fair share of experience with indoor gnats. However, I have not had to deal with gnats in a closed setup of delicate flora. Worried about the health of the plants, I looked into ways of tackling fungal gnat infestations. Posts on websites such as [The Fern and Mossery](http://www.thefernandmossery.com/2009/08/q-and-gnats-in-terrarium.html),  [Planet Natural](https://www.planetnatural.com/pest-problem-solver/houseplant-pests/fungus-gnat-control/), and [GardenWeb](http://forums.gardenweb.com/discussions/2161430/help-flies-flies-everywhere-in-my-terrarium) essentially say the same things concerning the war against fungal gnats.

**Possible plans of attack:**
  - It is extremely difficult to completely get rid of gnat larvae without cleaning out the entire setup
  - Traditional gnat-icide methods may be too harsh for the delicate terrarium environment (soap, soil replacement)
  - Drying out the soil for several days may be effective
  - Planting [sundews](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drosera) or [butterworts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pinguicula)
  - Gently toiling the soil to disrupt juvenile insects/eggs
  - Yellow sticky paper to trap gnats
  - Applying [_Bacillus thuringiensis_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bacillus_thuringiensis) to kill gnat larvae
  
#### Generative Music

(insert comment here)

### Concerns

(insert comment here)

### To-Do

(insert comment here)
